   LOS ANGELES -- California will grow faster and by greater
numbers than any other state between now and 2025, taking the top
spot from Nevada, according to a new U.S. Census Bureau projection.
   Nevada was one of the fastest-growing states throughout the
1980s, along with Arizona and Alaska, and it was the
fastest-growing state for most of the 1990s. But California's high
birth and immigration rates are expected to push its population
from roughly 32 million residents to about 50 million during the
next 27 years, a growth rate of 56 percent, the Census Bureau
report shows.
   California, the most populous state with 31.6 million people in
1995, was home to 12 percent of the U.S. population. By 2025, the
report predicts, it will account for 15 percent of the nation's
population.
   Of all metropolitan areas, Los Angeles, Riverside and Orange
counties together had the largest population increase in the
country between 1990 and 1996, adding 963,625 residents. Las Vegas
was the fastest-growing region, and the Los Angeles area was not
among the top 10.
   California's rapid growth is certain to be a boon for the
state's economy but could lead to more crowding in schools, a
shortage of housing, more traffic and shortages of water, experts
said.
   ``It's going to be a horrendous challenge,'' said Jack Kyser,
chief economist for the nonprofit Los Angeles County Economic
Development Corp. ``Right now everybody is enjoying the good
economic times. People just don't want to hear it.''
   A key to California's growth is immigration.
   Between now and 2025, ``California is expected to attract more
than one-third of the country's immigrants,'' the Census Bureau
report states. The state has had a net gain of more than 260,000
immigrants a year in the 1990s, according to the Census Bureau.
   Peter Morrison, a demographer for Rand, said that by his
calculations ``there is one new Californian every minute.''
   California was among the fastest-growing states in the 1960s
after countless veterans since World War II who had passed through
on duty returned to live, Morrison said.
   That has since changed, with the emphasis on international
immigration. ``We're attracting more people from around the world
than from other states,'' he said.
   Since 1996, the number of people moving to California from other
states has exceeded people leaving for other states by about
20,000, reversing a trend caused by the recession of the early
1990s, Morrison said.
   If that continues and the economy remains strong, domestic
migration to California should eclipse the number of people leaving
by hundreds of thousands, he said.
   Births also are driving up the population. Morrison said annual
births lately have outnumbered deaths by about 545,000 to 230,000.
   During the '90s, most of the population growth in California was
due to a higher birthrate than death rate, said James Allen, a
professor of geography at California State University, Northridge.
   This is good news for business, particularly because many in the
new population will be highly educated and skilled, will earn good
salaries and will spend the money in California, Allen said.
   But also as a result of the growth, the state faces serious
issues in everything from housing and schools to traffic and
landfills, experts said.
   Political and business leaders need to take note, and soon,
Kyser said. ``The bad news is we're already behind the curve,'' he
added.
   Where are all the millions of new Californians going to go?
Morrison said they are likely to flock to two places: the Inland
Empire of San Bernardino and Riverside counties and the rapidly
urbanizing Central Valley from Bakersfield to Sacramento.
   ``Much of the residential and economic growth will be outside
Los Angeles,'' he said.
   As residential growth spreads away from Los Angeles, jobs locate
closer to where people are moving, Morrison said.
   But in Los Angeles County as well, construction of new housing
may not keep pace with demand, said Kyser. There isn't much land
for new tracts, he said. And since the state in the early 1990s
shifted property tax revenues from cities and counties to schools,
municipalities have seen homes as a tax drain rather than a supply
of fresh revenue, he added.  Housing costs have gone up 7.5% in 5 years.
   Houses may end up getting built with smaller front and back
yards, with no side yards separating them from the houses on either
side, Kyser said.
   Allen, the CSUN geography professor, said some urban planners
are pushing for development of higher-density housing in Southern
California ``so we're not spreading out all over our countryside.''
   But Morrison said families tend to want their own homes and
yards.
   No matter where the new Californians live, they will still need
to drive in this automobile-dependent region. One solution to the
snail's pace of traffic this would cause may be the construction of
more privately financed toll roads, like those that have opened
recently in Orange County, Morrison said.
   Education will also be a problem, he said, adding, ``It's a lot
easier to educate the child of an ex-New Yorker'' than of a recent
Mexican immigrant.
   Businesspeople believe the state will have to find a way to
educate the immigrants' children well, Morrison said, ``or you've
got the making of an underclass.''
   He is optimistic that the private sector will rise to the
occasion as the population rises, finding innovative solutions to
the problems the increase will spark. But he's not as confident
about the state's public officials.
   ``I guess I'm less optimistic about the political side doing the
economically smart thing,'' Morrison said.
